Stanford University regards the diversity of its graduate student body as an important factor in serving the educational mission of the university. We encourage you to share unique, personally important, and/or challenging factors in your background, such as work and life experiences, special interests, culture, socioeconomic status, the quality of your early educational environment, gender, sexual orientation, race or ethnicity. Please discuss how such factors would contribute to the diversity of the entering class, and hence to the experience of your Stanford classmates. (700 words)

---


I grew up with science and mathematics. My grandparents were spectroscopists, engineers, and doctors, all with graduate degrees. My father is a mathematics professor. Everyone who still works in my family lives by their work. Since I could remember, my father would tell me stories of how the world formed after the Big Bang, what the universe was made up of, what electrons were, and how molecules interacted. My favorite stories were about Mendeleev and his discovery of the periodic table (we Russians are very proud of him). We went fossil hunting, explored different chemical reaction using my chem kit, categorized rocks I found outside using different acids. The only career path I considered was a scientist (besides my short-lived obsession with ballerinas).

However, childhood aspirations often have to traverse a rocky path before they are realized. Graduating from one of the best high schools in New York City with five advanced science and math courses under my belt and a decently high GPA, I went on to college with the intentions of becoming a mathematician, just like my father. After my first year, though, I found myself crying in bed over my sliding grades and growing dissatisfaction with mathematics. It took me another year to realize that my lack of confidence and inability to keep up with my classes, had a deeper cause than I would even think: I never truly believed I would succeed in achieving my goals. If you take a closer look at my family history it makes sense: all the women in my family quit their careers when they started a family. This was usually right after they finished their education, even if they got their PhDs. There was an unspoken expectation in my family, it seemed, that women had to have their kids in their twenties, and put their kids before their careers. I presumed a similar fate for myself. What is the use of fully committing yourself to a field of study if you know deep inside that your destiny is raising kids? This mentality was never a conscious belief. After becoming aware of it I did everything to prove myself to be above it.

I dedicated what little was left of my undergraduate education to developing my scientific thinking and accumulating skills. I switched my degree to physics since I personally found the research physicist did to be more applicable and meaningful. I supplemented physics classes with classes in probability, statistics, operations research, and computer science to build a broad theoretical base and learn different ways of thinking about problems. I tried both computational research - in my Computational Physics class - and theoretical research - my senior thesis under Professor Jevicki. To firm up my research experience I decided to take some time off after graduation before applying to graduate school. After some probing, I was lucky enough to get the opportunity to work with Professor Matveyev on theoretical evolutionary genetics: a good mix of Bayesian statistics, Markov stochastic processes, and computer simulations. Doing this research for over a year, I decided that in graduate school, I want to continue in this field. I also care about the tangibility of my research: being able to work with real-life data or closely with experimentalists. At Stanford Applied Physics, I would love to work with people like Professors Daniel Fisher and Andy Spakowitz. Their work combines my interest in mathematical approaches to genetics while making direct connections to experiment.

After committing to physics one of the main obstacles I had was my low confidence inherited from my past mentality, even though I had the same grades and understanding of the material as my male counterparts. I’ve learned that the only way to shake this is to discuss the material I was learning and my research with other people. This practice improved my scientific reasoning, explaining complicated concepts more clearly and in simpler terms. Seeing people understand and get interested not only improved my confidence but also made me feel part of the scientific community. Discussion is a very important part of any scientific community because it improves the exchange of thoughts (better than any paper could), inspires new ideas, and is the foundation of collaborations. Though this may seem pretty self-explanatory, lack of belief in women to succeed in science and lack of expectation for women to participate in scientific discussion often makes them feel outside the community. This is something, I found many men in physics do not understand. If a department wants to move toward more inclusivity and diversity its members should understand why it hasn’t been able to achieve this before. I hope to bring my perspective and understanding of this to the department to help enable other women to stay and pursue their interests in physics. 
